get_nitrous.md, before:

# Get your own Nitrous.io account

Go to https://www.nitrous.io

Click on "Get Started for Free"

![Get Started for Free](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/getit.jpg "Click Get Started for Free")

Fill in the form with any username and email you like (and can access, as it will send a confirmation message.) Pick a username and password that you'll remember on the day of the workshop. 😉

They will send you an email. Click the link in the email to verify your account.

![Email verification](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/email.jpg "Click the link to verify your email address")

You will then want to choose a price level (I like "free")

![Price](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/price.jpg "Click $0 per month")

and then scroll down and choose a region (this workshop is on the east coast of the US, so that seems like a good choice). Then click "Create Workstation."

![Region](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/region.jpg "Click US East and Create Workstation")

Now go get a coffee (or make a tutorial 😁) while the system processes.

![Wait for it](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/wait.jpg "Wait while a workstation is created")

When it's finished, you might get a popup asking you for money. You can close it.

![Say no to popups](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/no_popup.jpg "Close the popup")

Now a screen will come up, showing a nearly invisible (on my monitor, anyway) box with a plus sign. Click it.

![Click the plus sign](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/invisible_plus.jpg "Click the plus sign")

It will give you two random words as your project's name, which you're welcome to keep or change, as you like. 

Make sure you choose __Python__, and then click "Create Project"

![Choose python and click create project](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/python.jpg "Choose Python and click Create Project")

(Get coffee again.) 

Once the project has been created, click "Open IDE."

![Open IDE](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/open_ide.jpg "Open IDE")

Now you're in your Nitrous project! Click the icon at the bottom right of the top panel to make the command line interface full screen.

![Full screen](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/fullscreen.jpg "Full screen")

Now you have a command line interface to play with.

When you want to close it, you can just close the tab it's in, or you can (as Nitrous would no doubt prefer) choose "Close Workstation" from the menu at the top right of the screen.

![Close workstation](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/stop.jpg "Close workstation")

Commit message:

Adding instructions for getting back INTO Nitrous

get_nitrous.md, after:

# Get your own Nitrous.io account

## Initial Setup

Go to https://www.nitrous.io

Click on "Get Started for Free"

![Get Started for Free](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/getit.jpg "Click Get Started for Free")

Fill in the form with any username and email you like (and can access, as it will send a confirmation message.) Pick a username and password that you'll remember on the day of the workshop. 😉 It might make you do a CAPTCHA to prove you are not a robot.

![Choose "create account"](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/create_account.jpg "Choose 'Create Account'")

They will send you an email. Click the link in the email to verify your account.

![Email verification](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/email.jpg "Click the link to verify your email address")

You will then want to choose a price level (I like "free")

![Price](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/price.jpg "Click $0 per month")

and then scroll down and choose a region (this workshop is on the east coast of the US, so that seems like a good choice). Then click "Create Workstation."

![Region](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/region.jpg "Click US East and Create Workstation")

Now go get a coffee (or make a tutorial 😁) while the system processes.

![Wait for it](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/wait.jpg "Wait while a workstation is created")

When it's finished, you might get a popup asking you for money. You can close it.

![Say no to popups](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/nopopup.jpg "Close the popup")

Now a screen will come up, showing a nearly invisible (on my monitor, anyway) box with a plus sign. Click it.

![Click the plus sign](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/invisible_plus.jpg "Click the plus sign")

It will give you two random words as your project's name, which you're welcome to keep or change, as you like. 

Make sure you choose __Python__, and then click "Create Project"

![Choose python and click create project](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/python.jpg "Choose Python and click Create Project")

(Get coffee again.) 

Once the project has been created, click "Open IDE."

![Open IDE](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/open_ide.jpg "Open IDE")

Now you're in your Nitrous project! Click the icon at the bottom right of the top panel to make the command line interface full screen.

![Full screen](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/fullscreen.jpg "Full screen")

Now you have a command line interface to play with.

When you want to close it, you can just close the tab it's in, or you can (as Nitrous would no doubt prefer) choose "Close Workstation" from the menu at the top right of the screen.

![Close workstation](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/stop.jpg "Close workstation")

## Getting back in

When you want to go back into Nitrous, return to https://www.nitrous.io, and this time click on "Log In"

![Log in](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/comeback.jpg "Log in")

Log in with the username and password that you definitely remember from setting up your account. 😁

![Log in](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/login.jpg "Log in")

Your IDE will likely be off, so you'll want to click the button with the power-on symbol, and choose "Start" from the drop-down.

![Power, then Start](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/start_ide.jpg "Power, then Start")

The virtual box will turn on, and then you will be able to hit the "Open IDE" button.

![Open IDE](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/csheldonhess/c4l16-cli-workshop/master/images/open_ide2.jpg "Open IDE")

And you're in!
